Use client tools to query a warehouse
Completed
100 XP
8 minutes
Using SQL Server Management Studio (SSMS) to connect to a data warehouse in Fabric can facilitate your workflow, especially if you’re already familiar with the tool.

Connect to your data warehouse
SQL Server Management Studio provides a familiar interface for those who regularly work with SQL Server.

Animated GIF showing how to generate the connection string for a data warehouse in Microsoft Fabric.

Follow these steps to connect to data warehouse in Fabric from SSMS:

Navigate to your Microsoft Fabric workspace.

On your warehouse asset, select more options, then select Copy SQL connection string.

Launch SQL Server Management Studio, and paste the SQL connection string copied into the Server name box, and provide the appropriate credentials for authentication.

Screenshot showing how to connect to a warehouse using SQL Server Management Studio.

After establishing a connection, SSMS shows the connected warehouse, along with its corresponding tables and views, all ready for querying.

Screenshot showing the connected warehouse in SQL Server Management Studio.

Authentication options
In Microsoft Fabric, two types of authenticated users are supported through the SQL connection string:

Microsoft Entra ID (formerly Azure Active Directory) user principals, or user identities
Microsoft Entra ID (formerly Azure Active Directory) service principals
 Note

SQL authentication is not supported.

Other tools
Any third-party tool can use the SQL connection string via ODBC or OLE DB drivers to connect to a Microsoft Fabric Warehouse or SQL analytics endpoint, using Microsoft Entra ID (formerly Azure Active Directory) authentication.